---
title: "From JetBrains to Vim"
subtitle: "A Modern Vim configuration and plugin set"
description: "A walkthrough detailing a Vim setup aimed at emulating the most-used features from JetBrains IDEs."
author: devsjc
date: "2023-09-23"
tags: [vim, vimrc, python]
---

Short on time? Skip straight to the [configuration](#vim-configuration)!

## Background: Why do this at all?

I have been a long time user of JetBrains IDEs. As a Go developer primarily, I found early in my
career that GoLand offered a much improved and polished Go coding experience than VSCode at the
time. Ever since, I have been a JetBrains advocate for all of my development, regardless of
language. They have a fantastic suite of products which enable a fast and painless workflow, and
manage to keep the cognitive load low even when working on major refactors of large projects - a
task that could span weeks of development time and a great many files.

Recently however, in the wake of the [death of it's creator Bram Moolenaar](https://arstechnica.com/gadgets/2023/08/bram-moolenaar-creator-of-the-beloved-vim-text-editor-has-passed-away/),
I have decided to take a look at Vim. As such, I spent a while learning the most basic Vim motions,
and read through Drew Neil's [Practical Vim](https://pragprog.com/titles/dnvim2/practical-vim-second-edition/)
until I was comfortable enough using the editor without getting stuck.

Vim users promise a workflow speed like no other by embracing Vim's usage patterns; a sentiment I
will try to at least ideologically adhere to, however, in order to keep my productivity up to at
least a similar level as with my JetBrains IDEs, the Vim setup we will describe shortly attempts
to recreate a selection of my most-used, more modern features from JetBrains in Vim. 

(Before anyone mentions, I am aware that you can put vim motion plugins into JetBrains IDEs and
keep their benefits, or alternatively get much of the desired functionality as standard with
Neovim. Vim just seemed more of an interesting challenge to me! That being said, I would recommend
others trying to move to vim to follow that first approach and use a Vim motion plugin for a bit
before swapping editors.)

### Vim Overview: What is Vim anyway?

One thing Vim decidedly isn't, is an IDE. Vim is a text editor. It has a rich and active developer
community with a ton of plugins aimed at extending its capability far beyond that simple task, and
it's these plugins we will leverage to bend Vim to our advantage. 

From my initial investigation, the feeling was that trying to make it behave like an IDE will give
you the worst of both worlds. An obvious thing that Vim has over big IDEs such as those from
JetBrains is it is lightweight, and as such can be extremely fast, even with many files. Using too
many heavy plugins will remove this advantage, so I decided try to consciously stick to plugins
that have minimal performance impact in mind.

Learning how best to utilise these plugins required a bit of learning: since Vim isn't an IDE, many
of the functionalities that are bundled into IDEs have to be understood and incorporated on their
own - functionalities I hadn't considered as separate even, because I hadn't had to consider them
at all.

### Language functions: There's more going on than you think!

Say you're writing some code in an IDE. You're calling some function you defined elsewhere in your
source. You most likely will have undergone the following familiar pattern: 

1. Write the function call. The IDE guesses at the function you want to write based on the initial
   characters; you accept it's suggestion and save yourself a few keystrokes.
2. Fill in the parameters of the function. Perhaps you accidentally put a `string` value for a
   parameter that is defined to be an `int`. The IDE underlines your input, informing you of your
   mistake.
3. You right click on the function name in order to jump to the file where it is declared, and see
   that yes, it is expecting an `int`. 
4. You quickly switch back to the original file and modify the call. The IDE tidies up the
   indentation and closes your brackets. You continue with your day.

All a very natural interaction with your editor. I would, in the past, lump the sum of the IDE's
involvement under the term *Auto Completion*. However, there are a few different processes at play
here, handily bundled together and hidden from view by the IDE, namely: **Linting**, **Fixing**,
and **Auto Completion**, which can be, but doesn't have to be, a subset of a few **Language Server
Features**, also present. Lets see how these tie into our microcosm of coding above.

In step 1, we see an example of **auto completion**. This is the process of suggesting values for
what is intended to be typed. These are often provided by a **Language Server**, which offers up
relevant values (such as fields of a function or methods of a class) to a **Language Client**
according to it's understanding of the code semantics. This requires client and server follow the
[**Language Server Protocol (LSP)**](https://langserver.org/). In your IDE, server and client come
as part and parcel of the download. In Vim, we have to explicitly implement them - see later.

Step 2 involves **linting**, whereby errors and style warnings in your code are caught, usually by
the same or similar tool that compiles your code, and displayed to the user at the point of
interest. This is different to **fixing**, which involves cleaning up these errors and codestyle
deviations automatically, and is shown in step 4.

Step 3 is an example of another **LSP feature**, namely *go to definition*. The language server
uses its awareness of the code to enable a navigation to the definition of the function.

### Other IDE features: what else do they do?

So you see, even for that most basic seeming of IDE quality-of-life features, there is a lot going
on under the hood in order for it to work. And that's only one small part of what makes working in
an IDE so easy. When I use GoLand or PyCharm, I'm regularly using a bunch of useful inbuilt
functionality, such as:

1. Nice syntax highlighting of any language
2. Git integrations: modified line and file indications in gutter and file browser
3. "Refactor" options to modify all occurrences of a field, function, or class
4. Test pane and test configurations to pass env vars through
5. Terminal pane for testing programs and using command line git
6. Debugger for stepping through code

Some of these we'll be able to set up satisfactorily in Vim, but some will remain a sub-par
imitation of the smoothness of the JetBrains implementation.

Enough chat! Lets get on to the configuration and plugins!

## Vim configuration

The configuration edits to Vim itself are fairly minimal. Here is the Vim-specific config section
from the top of the `~/.vim/vimrc` file:

```vim
 "=== VIM SETTINGS ===================================="

unlet! skip_defaults_vim
source $VIMRUNTIME/defaults.vim

syntax enable
filetype plugin indent on
set hlsearch incsearch ignorecase
set number relativenumber
set encoding=UTF-8

if $COLORTERM == 'truecolor'
  set termguicolors
endif

let mapleader="\<space>"
nnoremap <leader>c :botright term<CR>
```

Lets step through each section.

First, the lines

```vim
unlet! skip_defaults_vim
source $VIMRUNTIME/defaults.vim
```

Prevents Vim from ignoring the defaults file, which it normally would do upon discovering a user's
custom `vimrc`. The defaults file contains a bunch of handy settings, including the ever-present
`set nocompatible`. Sourcing it basically saves several lines in the custom `vimrc`. Next, 

```vim
syntax on
filetype plugin indent on
```

enables Vim's inbuilt syntax highlighting, and the running of file-specific autocommands according
to the file being edited. This means Vim knows e.g. what the comment char is for the current file,
as well as the indentation rules, and will apply them accordingly as you code.

```vim
set hlsearch incsearch ignorecase
set number relativenumber
set encoding=UTF-8
```

The first line here improves Vim's `/` search function to incrementally highlight matches and
ignore case differences. The second line adds a relative number row, preventing you from having to
count to know what number to prepend your `l` and `h` movements with. It also displays the current
absolute line number in the same row.
Finally we enable the use of unicode with `set encoding=UTF-8`.

```vim
let mapleader="\<space>"
nnoremap <leader>c :botright term<CR>
```

Our first remappings! Firstly, the *leader key* is set to be the space bar - this is up to personal
preference, some people prefer a key on or near the home row. The leader key enables us to set
custom shortcuts without fear of overwriting any existing vim keybindings. This is exemplified on
the second line, which remaps a pressing of the leader key and `c` to run the vim command
`:botright term` and then `Enter`, or as Vim knows it, *Carriage Return*, hence `<CR>`. The
`nnoremap` means the remap is defined in Vim's *Normal Mode*. See more info on modes
[here](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/vim-editor-modes-explained/).

*Update: There is a better workflow for accessing the terminal whilst using Vim, one which simply
makes use of general shell commands: in normal mode, press `Ctrl+z`, which suspends the current
terminal task (Vim) to the background. You can then interact with your terminal, use git or install
a library etc, and when finished, use either `fg %1` or just `%` to bring Vim back to the front.
This improves on the `:terminal` terminal as it will remember any activated virtual environments
between usages.*

## Plugins

At this point, we have a workable Vim setup. Many Vim purists would urge it is left there; far
from it my place to say what the best approach is. All I know is I personally require a bit more
handholding in my editor - those who do not can leverage one of the joys of Vim: the
front-and-centre ability to customise it as much or little as desired. The additional features we
choose to add next, and their configuration, will ensure we remain at least comfortable with mostly
vanilla Vim should the need arise.

What I would recommend, is not to install all the plugins at once. Rather, install each new plugin
one at a time, and take some time to play around with each one and learn their commands, both
mapped and unmapped. This way you will not be overwhelmed and you will have a clearer picture of
what options and commands are actually available to you.

### Plugin manager: Vim Packager

Plugin: [**kristijanhusak/vim-packager**](https://github.com/kristijanhusak/vim-packager)

With Vim 8, native package management was included. By cloning the plugin directory into
`~/.vim/pack/<whatever>` Vim will pick up the plugin and automatically load it. However, since in
order to find my optimum plugin setup I would be installing, testing, and uninstalling many
plugins, I decided to save myself some manual labour and use a plugin manager - albeit one that
keeps a close tie to that inbuilt solution. I chose Vim Packager, as it's `:PackagerInstall`
command simply does the aforementioned cloning into the default package folder for you, whilst
`:PackagerClean` handles `rm -r`-ing unused plugin directories. As such, it is a very simple
wrapper on top of pre-existing functionality in Vim.

Adding packages with Vim packager is as simple as adding

```vim
function! s:packager_init(packager) abort
    call a:packager.add('some/plugin')
endfunction

packadd vim-packager
call packager#setup(function('s:packager_init'))
```

saving your `vimrc` with `:w`, sourcing it with `:source ~/.vim/vimrc` (or exiting and reloading
Vim), and running `:PackagerInstall` to clone all the plugins specified by `a:packager.add()`
calls within the `s:packager_init` function. For each code snippet below, the `call a:packager.add`
line should always be within that function block, and the rest below the entire packager
configuration. With that in mind, lets add our first plugin!

### Fuzzy finding and search: FZF

Plugin: [**junegunn/fzf.vim**](https://github.com/junegunn/fzf.vim)

FZF is a fast fuzzy search for vim, invaluable for navigating both inter- and intra- file. This is
the first major deviation from usual IDE behaviour, as instead of relying on an always-visible
file tree to navigate a project and select files, we will utilise FZF's file search capabilities.
The plugin does not include the binaries, so be sure to install `fzf` and `the-silver-searcher`
(I use [homebrew](https://brew.sh/)).

Add the packager calls into the relevant function, and then specify the additional config:

```vim
"In the packager function"
call a:packager.add('junegunn/fzf', { 'do': './install --all && ln -s $(pwd) ~/.fzf'})
call a:packager.add('junegunn/fzf.vim')

"Elsewhere in the vimrc"
"--- FZF settings --------------------------------"
nnoremap <silent> <leader>f :Lines<CR>
nnoremap <silent> <leader>F :Ag<CR>
nnoremap <silent> <leader>b :Buffers <CR>
nnoremap <silent> <leader>g :GFiles <CR>

"Map buffer quick switch keys"
nnoremap <silent> <leader><Tab> <C-^>
```

Exit vim (`:wq`), reload it (`vim ~/.vim/vimrc`), and run `:PackagerInstall` to download the
plugin and binary.

Here we have created four remaps for what I consider the most important FZF features:
- Search in-file: `<leader>f`, akin to JetBrains' `CMD+f`
- Search in all files: `<leader>F`, akin to JetBrains `CMD+F`,
- List files: `<leader>g`
- List buffers: `<leader>b`

The first two are self-explanatory with their JB counterparts, but the last two require a little
explanation. Firstly, rarely if ever will I code in a project that isn't a Git repository, so I use
the FZF `:GFiles` command over the `:Files` command as it respects `.gitignore`. Pressing
`<leader>g` will bring up a list of all the files in the repository which I can fuzzy search
through to my desired choice. You will find that this is a far more efficient file selection method
than searching within a file tree, and to choose a file I already had open, I can use the much
shorter *buffer* list via `<leader>b`. The final remap enables a more familiar key combination to
swap to the most recently accessed buffer, `<leader><Tab>`, like JetBrains' `CTRL+Tab` binding.
With a bit of practice opening files in this manner you'll wonder why you ever used up a third of
your screen real estate on a file tree. 

*Buffers are a blog post in themselves; I won't go into them here. Suffice to say that newcomers to
vim will find more familiarity in using tabs for their files, but this behaviour should be
discouraged in favour of buffers. This is why I have only created mappings for buffer-based commands.*

Have a play with these mappings until their usage becomes familiar.

### LSP Features: LSP

Plugin: [**yegappan/lsp**](https://github.com/yegappan/lsp)

The first plugin we could point to to back up the "modern" adjective in the title, *lsp* is written
in and for Vim9, the latest major version of Vim at time of writing. This plugin is going to be
used to perform two of the four features mentioned above; *Auto Completion*, and *LSP Features*
(such as *GoTo Definition*, *Rename*, *Find References*). We incorporate it as follows, again
remembering to set the `call` line within the packager function at the top of the `vimrc`, and
running `:source ~/.vim/vimrc` then `:PackagerInstall` to clone the plugin:

```vim
call a:packager.add('yegappan/lsp')

"--- LSP settings ---------------------------------------------------"
let lspOptions = #{
    \ aleSupport: v:true,
    \ autoHighlight: v:true,
    \ completionTextEdit: v:true,
    \ noNewlineInCompletion: v:true,
    \ outlineOnRight: v:true,
    \ outlineWinSize: 70,
    \ showDiagWithSign: v:false,
    \ useQuickfixForLocations: v:true,
    \ }
autocmd VimEnter * call LspOptionsSet(lspOptions)

let lspServers = [
    \ #{ name: 'gopls', filetype: ['go', 'gomod'],  path: 'gopls', args: ['serve'] },
    \ #{ name: 'pylsp', filetype: ['py', 'python'], path: 'pylsp', args: []        },
\ ]
autocmd VimEnter * call LspAddServer(lspServers)

"Enable auto selection of the fist autocomplete item"
augroup LspSetup
    au!
    au User LspAttached set completeopt-=noselect
augroup END
"Disable newline on selecting completion option"
inoremap <expr> <CR> pumvisible() ? "\<C-Y>" : "\<CR>"

"Mappings for most-used functions"
nnoremap <leader>i :LspHover<CR>
nnoremap <leader>d :LspGotoDefinition<CR>
nnoremap <leader>p :LspPeekDefinition<CR>
nnoremap <leader>R :LspRename<CR>
nnoremap <leader>r :LspPeekReferences<CR>
nnoremap <leader>o :LspDocumentSymbol<CR>
```

There's a lot going on here! Firstly lets look at 

```vim
let lspServers = [
    \ #{ name: 'gopls', filetype: ['go', 'gomod'],  path: 'gopls', args: ['serve'] },
    \ #{ name: 'pylsp', filetype: ['py', 'python'], path: 'pylsp', args: []        },
\ ]
```

From our discussion on the Language Server Protocol in the background section, you'll recall that a
*Language Client* communicated with a *Language Server* to get information about a piece of code.
Here we are defining the *language servers* that the plugin (*the language client*) will use, where
on our computer the server binary is located, and what filetypes to use it for. Here we describe
the servers for Python and Go, but many other languages are covered - see the
[lsp wiki](https://github.com/yegappan/lsp/wiki) for the full set and their configurations.

Note that this plugin does not install the servers, you have to do that manually.

```vim
"Enable auto selection of the fist autocomplete item"
augroup LspSetup
    au!
    au User LspAttached set completeopt-=noselect
augroup END
"Disable newline on selecting completion option"
inoremap <expr> <CR> pumvisible() ? "\<C-Y>" : "\<CR>"
```

These lines are described with comments; they basically make the autocompletion menu behave more
like the one we are used to in JetBrains IDEs: allowing for item selection with `<CR>` and always
highlighting the first completion option.

```vim
let lspOptions = #{
    \ aleSupport: v:true,
    \ autoHighlight: v:true,
    \ completionTextEdit: v:true,
    \ noNewlineInCompletion: v:true,
    \ outlineOnRight: v:true,
    \ outlineWinSize: 70,
    \ showDiagWithSign: v:false,
    \ useQuickfixForLocations: v:true,
    \ }
autocmd VimEnter * call LspOptionsSet(lspOptions)
```

These lines describe the plugin-specific configuration, documentation for which can be found in
[the plugin's doc/lsp.txt](https://github.com/yegappan/lsp/blob/main/doc/lsp.txt) file,
accessible in vim with `:h lsp-options`. These again are to preference, but the most important
one here is the first one: `aleSupport: v:true`. This allows us to pass off the *linting* side
of things to a dedicated plugin, in order to keep logical separation of functions and ensure we are
using the best tools for each task. That plugin is called ALE, and we'll look at it in a second.

```vim
"Mappings for most-used functions"
nnoremap <leader>i :LspHover<CR>
nnoremap <leader>d :LspGotoDefinition<CR>
nnoremap <leader>p :LspPeekDefinition<CR>
nnoremap <leader>R :LspRename<CR>
nnoremap <leader>r :LspPeekReferences<CR>
nnoremap <leader>o :LspDocumentSymbol<CR>
```

Finally, we have more custom remappings. These remap useful *LSP Features* to the leader key, so
`<leader>R` will present a dialogue box for renaming a symbol and all its uses; `<leader>d` will
take you to the definition of a symbol and so on.

### Linting and Fixing: ALE

Plugin: [**dense-analysis/ale**](https://github.com/dense-analysis/ale)

This plugin carries out the *Linting* and *Fixing* actions mentioned in the background section.
As a result, when errors are found in our code, we will be informed of them via signs in the
gutter, highlights on the words themselves, and **virtualtext** that will appear after the line if
the cursor rests upon it and it contains an error. This is vital to catching code mistakes early.

Whilst ALE also purports to bundle LSP features, we elect to ignore those in favour of our
standalone LSP plugin above. Again, our configuration specifies examples for Python and Go, but
again, much more info can be found in the [ALE documentation](https://github.com/dense-analysis/ale/blob/master/doc/ale.txt).

```vim
call a:packager.add('dense-analysis/ale')

"--- ALE settings ------------------------------------------------------"
"Disable ALE's LSP in favour of standalone LSP plugin"
let g:ale_disable_lsp = 1

"Show linting errors with highlights" 
"* Can also be viewed in the loclist with :lope"
let g:ale_set_signs = 1
let g:ale_set_highlights = 1
let g:ale_virtualtext_cursor = 1
highlight ALEError ctermbg=none cterm=underline

"Define when to lint"
let g:ale_lint_on_save = 1
let g:ale_lint_on_insert_leave = 1
let g:ale_lint_on_text_change = 'never'

"Set linters for individual filetypes"
let g:ale_linters_explicit = 1
let g:ale_linters = {
    \ 'go': ['gofmt', 'gopls', 'govet', 'gobuild'],
    \ 'python': ['ruff', 'mypy', 'pylsp'],
\ }
"Specify fixers for individual filetypes"
let g:ale_fixers = {
    \ '*': ['trim_whitespace'],
    \ 'python': ['ruff'],
    \ 'go': ['gopls', 'goimports', 'gofmt', 'gotype', 'govet'],
\ }
"Don't warn about trailing whitespace, as it is auto-fixed by '*' above"
let g:ale_warn_about_trailing_whitespace = 0
"Show info, warnings, and errors; Write which linter produced the message"
let g:ale_lsp_show_message_severity = 'information'
let g:ale_echo_msg_format = '[%linter%] [%severity%:%code%] %s'
"Specify Containerfiles as Dockerfiles"
let g:ale_linter_aliases = {"Containerfile": "dockerfile"}

"Mapping to run fixers on file"
nnoremap <leader>L :ALEFix<CR>
```

Much like with the LSP plugin above, we now have to tell ALE what linters and fixers to use for
what filetypes. This is done by the `g:ale_fixers` and `g:ale_linters` variables. For python I am a
fan of using `ruff` as it is extremely quick and can be configured by default in a
`pyproject.toml`, but you are free to choose from your favourite linters according to the
[full list of supported tools](https://github.com/dense-analysis/ale/blob/master/supported-tools.md).

I won't discuss much of the rest of the config here, as it should be increasingly familiar how
these `vimrc` configurations work, and the comments outline the purpose of the line sets. However,
for any configuration variables you want to know more details about, it will be good practice now
for you to find said details for yourself in the documentation, either
[in the plugins' `doc` folder](https://github.com/dense-analysis/ale/blob/master/doc/ale.txt)
(where you can look to find helper text files in most all Vim plugins), or in Vim itself using
`:h ale`.

One thing I will mention is the mapping: whilst linting is occurring and reoccurring regularly on
document changes, fixing only occurs on a manual step, and I shall explain why in the next plugin
section. Akin to the JetBrains' `CMD-Option-Shift-L` for code reformatting, here we specify the
more memorable `<leader>l` key combination to fix and format code:

```vim
nnoremap <leader>L :ALEFix<CR>
```

### QOL feature 1: Auto saving

Plugin: [**907th/vim-auto-save**](https://github.com/907th/vim-auto-save)

One thing that constantly throws me when moving from a JetBrains IDE to e.g. VSCode is the lack of
auto-saving. Let's save ourselves that same whiplash in Vim via this plugin:

```vim
call a:packager.add('907th/vim-auto-save')

"--- AutoSave settings ---------------------------------------------"
set noswapfile

let g:auto_save = 1
let g:auto_save_silent = 1
let g:auto_save_events = ["InsertLeave", "TextChanged", "FocusLost"]
```

Here we disable the swap file, a temporary file Vim saves changes to until they are manually saved,
and instead enable silent autosaving every time we leave insert mode, among other events.

### QOL feature 2: Auto pairing 

Plugin: [**jiangmiao/auto-pairs**](https://github.com/jiangmiao/auto-pairs)

You'd be surprised at quite how much weight this plugin pulls into making Vim feel like a
responsive, modern IDE - and better still, we don't need to configure this one to get a familiar
experience. Just import it like all the others with

```vim
call a:packager.add("jiangmiao/auto-pairs")
```

and marvel at how much you associate automatic insertion of paired characters with a fast-feeling
editor!

### QOL feature 3: Git modification indicators

Plugin: [**airblade/vim-gitgutter**](https://github.com/airblade/vim-gitgutter)

Often whilst using a JetBrains IDE, I'll realise I changed something since the last commit that I
didn't want to change, and I'll click on the little git indicator in the gutter in order to revert
it. This can be done in Vim too with the `vim-gitgutter` plugin. Again, this one needs no
configuration:

```vim
call a:packager.add("airblade/vim-gitgutter")
```

### QOL feature 4: Statusline

Plugin: [**bluz71/vim-mistfly-statusline**](https://github.com/bluz71/vim-mistfly-statusline)

There are many statusline plugins to be had for Vim, but after trying a few, I've settled on
Mistfly statusline. It's lightweight, opinionated, and written in vimscript. Although many people
will say statuslines are unnecessary, I find they play a large part in reducing cognitive load and
increase the ease with which I can use Vim. Mistfly integrates with ALE and GitGutter to show you
at a glance what git branch you are currently working on, as well as the number of errors,
warnings, and info diagnostics associated with the current file. It also shows you the name of the
file you're editing (along with an icon if you install
[vim-devicons](https://github.com/ryanoasis/vim-devicons)) and the line and column number defining
the cursor's current position. We will configure this one ever so slightly:

```vim
call a:packager.add('bluz71/vim-mistfly-statusline')

"--- Mistfly statusline settings ------------------------------------------"
"Don't show the mode as it is present in statusline; always show the statusline"
set noshowmode laststatus=2
```

### QOL feature 5: Testing

Plugin: [**vim-test/vim-test**](https://github.com/vim-test/vim-test])

Another one of the miscellaneous features mentioned in the background section - integrated running
of unit tests. We achieve this with the vim-test plugin, in conjunction with the
[tpope/vim-dispatch](https://github.com/tpope/vim-dispatch) plugin for asynchronous running:

```vim
call a:packager.add('janko-m/vim-test', {'requires': 'tpope/vim-dispatch'})

"--- Vim Test settings -----------------------------------------------"
nnoremap <leader>tn :TestNearest<CR>
nnoremap <leader>tf :TestFile<CR>
nnoremap <leader>ts :TestSuite<CR>
nnoremap <leader>tl :TestLast<CR>

let test#strategy = "dispatch"
```

Here we use a handy feature of the packager plugin to visually represent plugin dependencies, but
the result of `:PackagerInstall` is the same as if they were defined separately - both repos are
cloned as usual.

The remappings enable a quick test workflow, for example: with the cursor on or near a test,
`<leader>tn` will detect the required test runner and launch it in the *quickfix list*. Whilst this
is quick, it definitely isn't up to the standards of the nicely laid-out test window I've grown
used to in PyCharm or GoLand - you can't see a tree of tests and filter on failure for instance.
This is one place where I haven't managed to get close enough to JetBrains to be truly comfortable
- if you know of a better system, leave a comment (or open an issue, depending on where you're
reading this), I'd be interested to hear it!

### Colorscheme

This is one that's entirely personal preference. Take a look on
[Vim Colour Schemes](https://vimcolorschemes.com/) and see if any call to you. After trying a few I
have settled on [sonokai](https://github.com/sainnhe/sonokai):

```vim
call a:packager.add('sainnhe/sonokai')

colorscheme sonokai
```

### Bonus 1: Better syntax highlighting

Plugin: [**sheerun/vim-polyglot**](https://github.com/sheerun/vim-polyglot)

I've left this as a bonus, as it goes against the lightweight plugin rule we've loosely been
adhering to. However, I have found it does improve the highlighting, at least for Python. With Vim
polyglot, substitutions in format strings such as `f"{str_var}/var"` are highlighted a different
colour to the rest of the string, whereas without it, the whole string is of uniform colour. This
may not matter enough to some people to bother with the big install, so you can choose to include
this one or not.

### Bonus 2: File tree

Plugin: [**lambdalisue/fern.vim**](https://github.com/lambdalisue/fern.vim])

Another bonus, because Vim has a perfectly serviceable file tree already in **netrw**. If you
search online, many Vim users urge new Vim users to fight the urge to immediately install file tree
plugins such as [preservim/nerdtree](https://github.com/preservim/nerdtree) for this reason. It's
true, if you get quick and comfortable with FZF then you will find those times you require a tree
to come with increasing rareness. However, when working on a big project, or a new project,
filetrees are helpful to begin with to gain an understanding of the layout of the project. So it's
up to you - if you feel you're able to survive with `netrw` alone, skip this; but if you want the
familiarity of a file tree to fall back on, then add the following to your `vimrc`:

```vim
call a:packager.add('lambdalisue/fern.vim', {'requires': [
      \ 'lambdalisue/fern-git-status.vim',
      \ 'lambdalisue/fern-renderer-devicons.vim',
      \ 'lambdalisue/fern-hijack.vim']})

"--- Fern Filetree settings -------------------------------------------"
let g:fern#renderer = "devicons"
let g:fern#default_hidden = 1
let g:fern#default_exclude = '\%(\.DS_Store\|__pycache__\|.pytest_cache\|.ruff_cache\|.git\)'

nnoremap <leader>a :Fern . -drawer -toggle<CR>
```

The extra requirements here add filetype icons and git status icons to each item in the tree, as
well as setting fern as the default explorer on opening a directory with vim. The remap specifies
`--toggle` to hide the drawer when running `<leader>a` a second time, in order to encourage
eventual independence from the tree. 

### Bonus 3: Remapping cheat sheet

Plugin: [**liuchengxu/vim-which-key**](https://github.com/liuchengxu/vim-which-key)

We've made a fair few custom keybinds for our leader key in this config, so how do we go about
remembering them all? With a bit of luck, you've followed my advice and incrementally added in
each plugin until you feel confident remembering their mappings, but in case a refresher is ever
needed, we can use the *Which Key* plugin to jog our memory:

```vim
call a:packager.add('liuchengxu/vim-which-key')

"--- WhichKey settings ---------------------------------------------"
"Put this before any of the other plugin-specific config"
let g:mapleader = "\<Space>"
nnoremap <silent> <leader> :<c-u>WhichKey '<Space>'<CR>
set timeoutlen=200
```

The first line (that isn't the packager call) informs which-key that our leader key is mapped to
`<Space>`. We then remap a press of the leader key to bring up the which key menu for all remaps
using the `<leader>` key. This menu shows up after a certain timeout, which we specify to 200ms
with the final config line.

With this plugin installed, we can press the leader key and then visually explore the keybound
options available to us. Eventually unnecessary, but useful whilst we're still getting to grips
with our bindings!

## Wrap up

And there it is. We now have a workable JetBrains-style setup in Vim. If you want to see the full
`vimrc`, check out this [GitHub gist](https://gist.github.com/devsjc/6d9f2c377a6b5695ef64160b230d7f47).
Hopefully it will allow you to start enjoying the fun of this 20+ year old editor!

--------------

## Further reading

On getting to grips with Vim:

- [Practical Vim, Second Edition by Drew Neil](https://pragprog.com/titles/dnvim2/practical-vim-second-edition)
- [Vim Editor Modes Explained (freecodecamp)](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/vim-editor-modes-explained/)
 
